.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0-or-later
.TH USBEXPLORER 1 "2026-06-25" "usbexplorer 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
usbexplorer \- inspect the USB device tree (CLI, TUI and GTK4 GUI)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B usbexplorer
.RI [ MODE ]
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B usbexplorer
is a Linux reimplementation of USB Device Tree Viewer.  It enumerates the USB
topology from sysfs (and, where helpful, libusb), decodes every standard
descriptor type, and presents the result through a non-interactive CLI, a
full-screen ncurses TUI, or a GTK4/libadwaita GUI.
.PP
With no mode option it prints the device tree (equivalent to
.BR \-\-tree ).
.SH MODES
.TP
.B \-l, \-\-list
One line per device, in the style of
.BR lsusb (8).
.TP
.B \-t, \-\-tree
ASCII topology tree.  Add
.B \-i
to also list interfaces.
.TP
.B \-j, \-\-json
Full decoded descriptor tree as JSON.  Add
.B \-c
for compact (non-pretty) output.
.TP
.B \-x, \-\-xml
Full device tree as an XML report.
.TP
.B \-\-tui
Launch the interactive ncurses TUI.
.TP
.B \-\-gui
Launch the GTK4 graphical interface.
.TP
.B \-\-watch
Stream hotplug events as JSON lines until interrupted.
.TP
.BI \-\-diff " A,B"
Show a descriptor-level diff of two devices, each addressed as
.I BUSNUM.DEVNUM
or
.IR VID:PID .
.TP
.B \-\-history ", " \-\-history\-csv
Show the connect/disconnect audit log (table or CSV).
.SH DEVICE QUERIES
.TP
.BI \-\-udev\-rule " VID:PID"
Print a udev rule for the matching device.
.TP
.BI \-\-dmesg " BUSNUM.DEVNUM"
Print kernel-log lines that refer to the device.
.TP
.BI \-\-speed\-test " BUSNUM.DEVNUM"
Run a sequential read-speed test on a storage device.
.SH DEVICE ACTIONS
These require root; the GUI runs them through
.BR pkexec .
.TP
.BI \-\-reset\-device " BUSNUM.DEVNUM"
Reset the device with the USBDEVFS_RESET ioctl.
.TP
.BI \-\-restart\-device " BUSNUM.DEVNUM"
Unbind and rebind the usb driver.
.TP
.BI \-\-port\-cycle " BUSNUM.DEVNUM"
De-authorise then re-authorise the device.
.TP
.BI \-\-autosuspend " on|off:BUSNUM.DEVNUM"
Toggle runtime autosuspend.
.TP
.BI \-\-wakeup " on|off:BUSNUM.DEVNUM"
Toggle remote wakeup.
.SH FILTERING
.TP
.BI \-d, \-\-device " VID:PID"
Restrict output to matching device(s).
.TP
.BI \-s, \-\-serial " SERIAL"
Further restrict by serial number.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/usbexplorer/settings.ini
GUI session state (window geometry, theme, toggles).
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/usbexplorer/history.db
SQLite connect/disconnect audit log.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
List every device:
.B usbexplorer \-\-list
.TP
Dump one device's descriptors as JSON:
.B usbexplorer \-\-device 04f2:b7b7 \-\-json
.TP
Watch hotplug events:
.B usbexplorer \-\-watch
.SH EXIT STATUS
Returns 0 on success and non-zero on error (for example, a device not found or
insufficient privilege for an action).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR lsusb (8),
.BR udevadm (8)
.SH AUTHORS
The usbexplorer contributors.
